Problem Statement

According to reports from developers of Internet video applications and
operators of Internet video services, there is no standardized,
high-quality video codec that meets all of the following three
conditions:

1. Is optimized for use in interactive Internet applications.

2. Is published by a recognized standards development organization (SDO)
and therefore subject to clear change control and IPR disclosure rules.

3. Can be widely implemented and easily distributed among application
developers, service operators, and end users.

There exist codecs that provide high quality encoding of video
information, but that are not optimized for the actual conditions of the
public, consumer-level, best-effort Internet. Such optimizations might
include fast and flexible congestion control, such as the ability to
change resolution without sending a keyframe; a simple means of handling
packet loss in the face of reference frame re-ordering; the ability to
join broadcast streams without waiting for a keyframe; special coding
tools for screen captures to support remote services and desktop
sharing; and many more. According to reports, this mismatch between
design and deployment has hindered performance and interoperability of
such codecs in Internet applications.

There exist codecs that can be widely implemented, but were not
developed under the IPR rules of any SDO; according to reports, the lack
of clarity in their IPR status has hindered adoption of such codecs in
Internet applications.

There exist codecs that are standardized, but that cannot be widely
implemented and easily distributed; according to reports, the presence
of various usage restrictions (e.g., in the form of requirements to pay
royalty fees, obtain a license, enter into a business agreement, or meet
other special conditions imposed by a patent holder) has hindered
adoption of such codecs in Internet applications.

According to application developers and service operators, a video codec
that meets all three of these conditions would: (1) enable protocol
designers to more easily specify a mandatory-to-implement codec in their
protocols and thus improve interoperability; (2) enable developers to
more easily build innovative applications for the Internet; (3) enable
service operators to more easily deploy affordable, high-quality video
services on the Internet; and (4) enable end users of Internet
applications and services to enjoy an improved user experience.

Objectives

The goal of this working group is to ensure the existence of a single
high-quality video codec that can be widely implemented and easily
distributed among application developers, service operators, and end
users. At present it appears that ensuring the existence of such a codec
will require a development effort within the working group.

The core technical considerations for such a codec include, but are not
necessarily limited to, the following:

1. Designing for use in interactive applications (examples include, but
are not limited to, point-to-point video calls, multi-party video
conferencing, telepresence, teleoperation, and in-game video chat).

2. Addressing the real transport conditions of the Internet, such as the
flexibility to rapidly respond to changing bandwidth availability and
loss rates, or as otherwise identified and prioritized by the working
group.

3. Ensuring interoperability and clean integration with the Real-time
Transport Protocol (RTP), including secure transport via SRTP.

4. Ensuring interoperability with Internet signaling technologies such
as Session Initiation Protocol (SIP), Session Description Protocol
(SDP), and Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP). However,
the result should not depend on the details of any particular signaling
technology.

5. Ensuring suitability for use in Internet applications and Web APIs,
such as the HTML5 <video> tag, live streaming (e.g., via icecast),
adaptive streaming (e.g., Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over HTTP (DASH),
HTTP Live Streaming (HLS), etc.), the MediaSource API, the WebRTC APIs,
proposed web recording APIs, and so on. However, the result should not
depend on the details of any particular API.

Optimizing for very low bit rates (typically below 64 kbps) is out of
scope because such work might necessitate specialized optimizations.

In addition to the technical objectives, there is one process goal, which is

6. Ensuring the work is done under the IPR rules of the IETF.

Although a codec produced by this working group or another standards
organization might be used as a mandatory-to-implement technology by
designers of particular Internet protocols, it is explicitly not a goal
of the working group to produce a codec that will be mandated for use
across the entire IETF or Internet community nor would their be any
expectation that this would be the only mandatory-to-implement codec.

Based on the working group's analysis of the design space, the working
group might determine that it needs to produce a codec with multiple
modes of operation. However, it is not the goal of working group to
produce more than one codec.

In completing its work, the working group should collaborate with other
IETF working groups to complete particular tasks. These might include,
but would not be limited to, the following:

- Within the AVT WG, define the codec's payload format for use with the
Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP).

- Collaborate with RMCAT and any other appropriate working groups in the
Transport Area to identify important aspects of packet transmission over
the Internet.

- Collaborate with RMCAT to understand the degree of rate adaptation
desirable, and to reflect that understanding in the design of a codec
that can adjust its transmission in a way that minimizes disruption to
the video.

- Collaborate with working groups in the RAI Area to ensure that
information about and negotiation of the codec can be easily represented
at the signaling layer.

- Collaborate with working groups in the RAI Area such as CLUE and
RTCWEB to ensure the codec can satisfy all of their video-related use
cases.

The working group will coordinate with the ITU-T (Study group 16) and
ISO/IEC (JTC1/SC29 WG11), with the intent of submitting the completed
codec RFC for co-publication by the ITU-T and ISO if they find that
appropriate. To facilitate the potential for co-publication, and
recognizing other SDOs like ISO/IEC (JTC1/SC29 WG11) are assessing video
codec technologies for potential royalty-free standardization, the
working group will seek on an ongoing basis where feasible to
communicate through existing liaison channels and meetings, evaluate and
share in-process proposals, test results, code bases, and IPR
information, and facilitate parallel consideration of the working
group's work-in-progress for royalty-free standardization under
processes like the Common Patent Policy for ITU-T/ITU-R/ISO/IEC.

The Guidelines for Development of an Audio Codec within the IETF (RFC
6569) will form the starting point for guidelines and requirements for
achieving the forgoing objectives for video. The working group will
modify them as necessary with lessons learned during that process (for
example, specifying the use of English text as the normative definition
of the codec instead of source code), refining them into a new document
in accordance with the usual IETF procedures once consensus has been
achieved.

A codec that can be widely implemented and easily distributed among
application developers, service operators, and end users is preferred.
Many existing codecs that might fulfill some or most of the technical
attributes listed above are encumbered in various ways. For example,
patent holders might require that those wishing to implement the codec
in software, deploy the codec in a service, or distribute the codec in
software or hardware need to request a license, enter into a business
agreement, pay licensing fees or royalties, or attempt to adhere to
other special conditions or restrictions.

Because such encumbrances have made it difficult to widely implement and
easily distribute high-quality video codecs across the entire Internet
community, the working group prefers unencumbered technologies in a way
that is consistent with BCP 78 and BCP 79. In particular, the working
group shall heed the preference stated in BCP 79: "In general, IETF
working groups prefer technologies with no known IPR claims or, for
technologies with claims against them, an offer of royalty-free
licensing." Although this preference cannot guarantee that the working
group will produce an unencumbered codec, the working group shall follow
BCP 79, and adhere to the spirit of BCP 79. The working group cannot
explicitly rule out the possibility of adopting encumbered technologies;
however, the working group will try to avoid encumbered technologies
that require royalties or other encumbrances that would prevent such
technologies from being easy to redistribute and use. The working group
should not proceed with publication of a codec RFC if there is consensus
that it cannot "be widely implemented and easily distributed among
application developers, service operators, and end users."

Deliverables

1. A set of Codec Standardization Guidelines that define the work
processes of the working group. This document shall be Informational.

2. A set of technical Requirements. This document shall be
Informational.

3. Specification of a codec that meets the agreed-upon requirements, in
the form of an Internet-Draft that defines the codec algorithm. The text
description of the codec shall describe the mandatory, recommended, and
optional portions of the encoder and decoder. It is envisioned that this
document shall be a Proposed Standard document.

4. A reference implementation of a software encoder and decoder. This
will be in a separate document from the text description to allow it to
be updated independently. It does not need to be standards-track.

5. Specification of a storage format for file transfer of the codec, to
support non-interactive (HTTP) streaming, including live encoding and
both progressive and chunked downloads. It is envisioned that this
document shall be a Proposed Standard document.

6. A collection of test results, either from tests conducted by the
working group or made publicly available elsewhere, characterizing the
performance of the codec. This document shall be informational.

Goals and Milestones
TBD  WGLC on codec standardization guidelines
TBD  WGLC on requirements, liaise to other SDOs
TBD  Requirements to IESG (Informational)
TBD  Liaise requirements RFC to other SDOs
TBD  Codec standardization guidelines to IESG (Informational)
TBD  WGLC on codec specification, liaise to other SDOs
TBD  WGLC on reference implementation, liaise to other SDOs
TBD  Submit codec specification to IESG (Standards Track)
TBD  Submit reference implementation to IESG (Informational)
TBD  WGLC on storage format specification
TBD  Submit storage format specification to IESG (Standards Track)
TBD  WGLC on Testing document
TBD  Testing document to IESG
